Just by paying attention to the work
that was happening at all levels of the
company from the lowest to the highest.
By paying attention and being like,
"Hey, that's a really good idea or have
you considered this?"
It made a culture of it's okay to have
ideas and have them move up and down.
And by the way, people would challenge
me. And in challenging me then they felt
confident that like we were going to get
to the best idea because it wasn't just
my idea. Creating this sort of
non-hierarchical culture that's not
bound by time or geography or role,
really powerful.
>> [music]
>> Okay, this episode is with Tom Hale, an
old friend of mine who's the CEO of
Oura, of Oura Ring fame. When I was in
my early 50s, I had a very bad
snowmobile accident and drove with
snowmobile
and you can't see my body, but it's
absolutely chock-full of metal and I
thought I was going to die that night. I
was lying at the bottom of the cliff
and
um
I've been a CEO of HubSpot for 15 years
like I'm done. I'm I'm tired. I'm done.
I'm burnt out. He went the other way,
you know, he had been kind of a
corporate executive some really
interesting companies his whole career.
In his early 50s he's like, "I want my
shot." And so we talked about that what
he didn't expect from the job, the good,
the bad, and the downright ugly of being
a CEO. He's pretty thoughtful about
that.
What really is interesting to me about
Tom is he spent his entire life in
companies between 200 and 2,000
employees. That is the messy middle.
That's where things slow down. That's
where bureaucracy happens. That's where
middle managers happen. That's where you
really slow the gears of progress down.
And we talk a bunch about what it takes
to keep that engine revving through that
and how not to get caught in the
quagmire.
We also talked about he's got a team in
in Finland. This company was started in
Finland and he's got a team here in the
US.
And man, are they different?
Um the Americans are obviously very
capitalist creatures and the Finnish are
much more on the socialist side. And we
talk about how to manage those two. And
a lot of you are in the US now and
thinking about going international. I
think there's a lot of lessons here for
you.
So, lots of good stuff. I'm going to get
you back at the end with my take on what
he had to say.
Thanks for being here.
>> Hey, thanks for having me, Brent. Um I
have a little story for you.
>> Okay.
Four years ago, I was snowmobiling in
Woodstock, Vermont. As one does. Yes.
And with my son and the snowmobile went
off a cliff.
>> Oh my god. It hit the bottom.
Snowmobile's in a million pieces. My son
and I were in a million pieces.
Um and at the bottom of that I know one
knew where we were and it was 4:00 in
the afternoon.
I was pretty sure we were both going to
die that night.
>> Mhm.
And while I was sitting there at the
bottom of the cliff, I said, "I need to
make some big changes in my life." No
more snowmobiles. Yes, that too.
[laughter]
But the biggest change was I don't want
to be a CEO anymore. Uh-huh. Why did you
want to be a CEO after all these years?
>> Wow, that's a good question.
Um I think the obvious answer and maybe
the the really the true answer is it was
a bucket list item I had to check off my
list.
>> And and the thing is actually and maybe
this is TMI, but I also wanted to prove
to myself that [snorts] I had it Yep.
>> to do it. Is it everything you had
hoped? And more.
>> Really? Um much much harder Okay. than
than I thought and I'm sure you can
appreciate that and any CEO in the world
will appreciate that. Much harder. Much
harder than I thought.
>> What's harder than you thought? Um
it's
it's not the work that's harder, it's
the responsibility and the stress. It's
the waking up at 4:00 a.m. and being
like, "Oh my god, is this going to
work?" And and what is it going to take
to make it work?
That I think it's pressure, it's stress,
it's responsibility, it's all the people
that you have you know, you
they they've put their faith in you
whether it's your board or your
employees or your customers and you have
to carry that and you know, what they
say, the buck stops here. Absolutely
true. Mhm.
I felt [snorts] that too. I was pretty
calm in the first four or five years of
HubSpot, but I was kind of stricken with
stress and started having I never had
any before panic attacks like five years
in and it was that. It was like, "Oh
man, we have 100 employees and they're
really counting on me."
>> 100%.
>> Um that was the
What do people misunderstand about
CEOing?
Well, I think they think it's a lot more
fun than it is.
>> Okay, so is it not fun? Uh no, I mean I
don't I don't think actually it's not
fun. I think there is fun. I just think
that the sort of ratio of kibble, you
know, to champagne favors the kibble
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> And and I think that that part of it is
the responsibility which we just talked
about, but part of it is also you kind
of the things about work that I really
enjoy like building something in a fine
grain of detail and making it beautiful
and and and owning that and feeling
pride in that. And I I still get that,
but just not as much.
>> Mhm.
>> [snorts]
>> Um or um feeling the success. You get
everyone gets to participate in the
success, but in some way like it's
really your team, it's not you who gets
to own that success. But you know what?
Participating in failure, you get to own
that failure because in many cases like
it was either your decision or your
direction or the system that you set up.
So, I think that's I think that's the
thing people get wrong is they don't
they don't understand. They think it's
like it's glamorous and it's it's this
and that and you're on podcast or
whatever. Like that's sure, there's an
element of that, but like that is not
the main portion of the experience. At
least not for me. I call it the [__]
umbrella. You have to like absorb all
the [__] for the company.
>> that's right. I I mean my my analogy is
that you're on a boat and that boat if
it's going great, your job is while
everyone's over on this side of the boat
being like, "Hey, everything's great
over here." And you have to be on this
side being like, "Everything's terrible.
We have to think about that." And vice
versa, when everything's terrible, you
got to go to the other side of the boat
and be like, "Hey guys, there is light
on the horizon and where we're going is
going to be great. It may feel terrible
right now, but we've got to get there."
And I think that that's that's a big
job, a big job of responsibility and
it's hard. Mhm.
I had some CEO heroes that I copied. I
copied Steve Jobs, Jerry Garcia, and my
dad. They were my Mount Rushmore
>> Wow. Okay.
>> Who's on your Rushmore?
Well, you know, Steve Jobs I think would
make it for sure. Um and I We're kind of
we're probably similar age and I think
people who grew up
>> I got to work, you know, tangentially.
We were an ISV on the on the Apple
platform. So, we got to meet him a
couple of times and he was a hero. The
person who came back and and recovered
Apple from its demise was a hero,
bonafide. Um and the sort of champion of
creative professionals. So, he would be
one. I think not necessarily a CEO, but
Gandhi partially because he uh
sort of as a man of the people and I
think humility is such an important both
value for me personally, but also for a
CEO. It's important. So, so Gandhi would
have it. And then God, if I had to think
of one more,
um
Oh, I know who it would be. So, Maya
Angelou.
Um not because she's such a great CEO,
but because she said something which I
really believe is which is like people
will remember how you make them feel.
And I think as a leader the unintended
consequence is actually the greatest
risk, not the intended consequence. And
if you leave people feeling, you know,
in a way that you don't intend to, I
think that could be devastating for a
company. A lot of CEOs of the generation
under younger than we are,
it's not Jobs, it's Elon.
>> Yeah. And they've absorbed his for
better or worse his work ethic
and 996 and a hard coreness about it. Um
this whole generation of founders is
kind of like that. What's your take on
that? And is is is your company like
that? Um
I am somebody who probably works 996 or,
you know, something like that, some
approximation of that. And and I think
um I think there is value in it.
However, I would modify it one bit which
is that if you're working 996 or your
version of that to the exclusion of
making sure that you are
um
thoughtful and recovered and in a good
state of mind. If you're in a constant
state of anxiety and a constant state of
activity and you don't leave room for
any kind of recovery or reflection,
you're probably not doing it right. At
least in my book. And so it it it at
Oura and and what's interesting about
Oura is that we make products that are
there to help you be healthier and to
find mindfulness and recovery in your
life. Um actually when I came on board,
we had to sort of push a little bit
towards the performance and you know, we
never say 996, but we say like no, we
you like we get the job done. And and we
do what it takes to get the job done.
And so I had to shift it a little bit in
that direction, but that at the same
time we never lost the values of rest
and recovery and the importance of it. I
think the thing is like finding that
balance, that's what we talk about. We
talk a lot about balance. How do you
find balance? And I think one of the
ways to think about it from a CEO
perspective is that different parts of
the company at different times in the
year, different stages of the product
cycle are going to be at peak Okay.
>> 996 and other parts are going to be at
recovery. And that's like you just ship,
you know what? Probably shouldn't go
back 996. Take a couple days. Recover.
Rest. Think about what you want to do
next. Be intentional. And so I think
that kind of idea that you can't run
everybody at at the redline all the
time. You got to you got to dial it up
and dial it down. You got to recognize
that if you're on the bomb run to ship,
it's going to be 996 or whatever it is
to to get there. Okay, speaking of your
employees, uh you're CEO of a company
that was founded in Finland.
>> Yes. Um
>> Very proud. Yeah, they should be.
Um and you should should
It's a wonderful company.
Um
Tell me a little bit about your first
trip to Finland.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, so so uh
I have worked with, you know,
uh Finns in the past. So, I had a little
bit of experience, but but I had never
been a a leader of Finns. I'd been a
partner and a colleague.
And so,
there's also, I think, a good tradition,
I think, in Finland of like
um
they're not hierarchical. Not Not a lot
of respect for
Not that they don't have They're not
disrespectful. It's just like, "Look,
you know, we're all It's very socialist,
non-hierarchical society." Yep. So, I
show up and um you know, they're like,
"Well, we're going to go do some sauna."
And of course, as you know, it's a
Finnish national tradition, and so we go
to the sauna, get in the sauna, it's
hot, I'm very hot. Then we, you know, we
go outside and it's very cold and we get
in the freezing, freezing cold water and
you're shaking and then you get back in
the sauna, it's great. And I was like,
"This is amazing. I feel like I've I've
passed the test. I've shown my true
Finnishness." And then of course, we
went to the second office, which is in
Oulu, which is a little bit further,
close, you know, closer to the North
Pole. And we did the exact same thing,
except no sauna.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, and so this time like,
literally, I'm not even getting hot to
get in the water. I'm just like, you
know, I'm stripping down to my my
skivvies, I'm walking into a river where
it's freezing cold, I'm sitting there
for 45 seconds, I'm monitoring my heart
rate on the Oura Ring app.
Mostly to say make sure I stay alive and
walk out and there's nowhere to get
warm, just a towel.
>> Okay, so you passed the Sounds like you
passed the test.
>> I passed the test, but maybe just
barely. Okay, you referred to Finns as
socialist.
Um Americans are very capitalist.
>> You've got call it close to half your
employees in each country.
>> Yep. What's it like with two different
very different cultures and trying to
blend them and manage them? Like, what I
Maybe this is a philosophy of culture,
which is that you can't make a single
culture. I mean, you can. There are
elements of our culture which are shared
across Finland and the US. Um you know,
passion for the product and a sense of
mission around health and
um you know, blah blah blah.
But the thing is, they're very distinct.
I think culture begins and ends at the
door. The Finnish culture is actually
different from the US culture and what
makes the company strong is that those
cultures can coexist and they can
stimulate each other and they can
uh you know, propagate ideas across
They're not They're not like uh They're
not one monoculture. They're They're two
cultures and they they generate ideas
and they generate activity in in ways
that are different. And And quite
frankly, I think, you know, it's part of
what makes a company good is to have a
diversity of cultures and viewpoints.
Okay, I would imagine you kind of like
at HubSpot and lots of other scale-up
companies
post-pandemic people got a little more
hardcore and more into performance
culture and just started pushing harder.
Not easy. What was It sounds like you
kind of went through something similar.
What was that like in Finland with the
Finnish employees? How'd that go over?
How'd you manage through that? You know,
um well, first of all, I think COVID, in
a weird way, was a health crisis that
everybody on the planet experienced. And
so, in some sense, you had a huge
commonality, weirdly. And as a
healthcare kind of oriented company, it
actually pulled people together. And in
a in a weird way, it also changed a
bunch of other norms about how you work,
you know, remotely and all that stuff.
And actually, quite quite positive. But
to kind of go to your question, um when
you know, post-COVID, you sort of had
everybody
um I don't know if you I felt like the
whole civilization of of humanity was
like in recovery post-COVID. And so, um
you know, one of the things that that I
felt really strongly that we had to do
was to sort of establish norms of
getting people to work together
um in person,
but not come to an office. And so, what
we did is we set up like um a fund and a
practice of bringing people together,
having them stay together for two or
three days, making it really intense, a
lot of connection, and we shifted budget
and time and energy to do that. And that
actually, I think, made a huge
difference post-COVID.
>> make sure that your your kind of a
remote culture, but you you fund get,
you know, whatever. Yeah, at the team
level, at the organization level, at the
company level, and get people together
in person, because it turns out, I don't
know, 100,000 generations of humanity
have have optimized for connecting in
person, right? Like, you know, I can
read your face and know that like you
trust me or you're listening to me or
you care about what I'm saying. And that
just reinforces all this cultural and
social capital that you have as a as a
team that you're sort of banking, so
that later when, you know, things get
tough or you're remote or whatever, you
can you can draw on it. So, that was a
big a big part of what we did. I think
the other thing that that that I, you
know, maybe this is what I did
personally, was I made a point of being
incredibly visible. Um even when I
couldn't be, you know, we had hired a
bunch of people during COVID, so you
can't I can't drop by your office. But
you know what I can do? I can kind of
lurk in your in your Slack chat and if I
see some really great work, I'm going to
comment directly right on that. And um
I think this is maybe this is a hint for
other folks or maybe if they want to do
this, they can.
Just by paying attention to the work
that was happening at all levels of the
company, from the lowest to the highest,
by paying attention and being like,
"Hey, that's a really good idea or have
you considered this?"
It It made a culture of it's okay to
have ideas and have them move up and
down. And by the way, people would
challenge me. And in challenging me,
then they felt confident that like we
were going to get to the best idea cuz
it wasn't just my idea. And he would do
that We did that in Slack or we did that
in these meetings that we pulled people
together.
>> And like creating this sort of
non-hierarchical culture that's not
bound by time or geography or role,
really powerful. Okay.
Um just kind of back to you.
You've had a super interesting career.
Um
you've kind of lived in that kind of
call it 200 to 2,000 employees, roughly.
>> Yeah.
Um
a lot of the
the found CEO founders I work with are
kind of in that spot.
>> about to go in that spot.
>> Yeah. What goes wrong between 200 and
2,000?
>> Yeah. Um yeah, let's start there. Well,
Steve Jobs famously said, right? You
know, when the bozos come.
Did they come? They did. Um I think in
every company in that scale, you you end
up hiring a lot of people and sometimes
your hiring is maybe the stakes are, I
don't know, slightly less high or
something like that. And somehow some
some bozos might come. So, the key is
like, you want to resist that, you want
to identify, you know, that and and move
to correct it if you can. And And by
bozos, just to be clear, you know,
they're people who are well-intentioned,
but maybe not as committed or as
mission-driven or as focused or whatever
it is.
So, in that scale, uh you have to be
careful. That's probably the biggest
risk I can see. The other risk, of
course, is that you lose whatever it was
that got you to 200 people, which is
that kind of like that passion, the
spirit, the sense of of mission that
brings everyone together to accomplish a
common goal. That's very difficult, but
requires everybody to like, you know,
put their shoulder against the wheel.
And I think what's interesting is that
if you can preserve that between 200 and
2,000 people, it's the most interesting
time in a company.
More than 2,000 stops being interesting
because you're managing managers who are
managing managers. And And your
influence is is muted. At 200 to 2,000
is a
uh I'm not a founder, I'm a CEO. But as
a CEO, I can be in touch with directly
those 2,000 people and I can touch them.
Just like I was talking about this sort
of idea of like going into someone's,
you know, small group Slack and being
present and being visible, you can do
that. And And people can talk to me.
They can walk up to me and I can I can
know their names and know what they're
working on and have an idea about like
what they're doing. I can say, "That's
not just hey, clap on the back, great
job." You know, it's more like, "You
know, I noticed what you did here and it
was really great." And that Those little
moments with a CEO
>> with that. huge.
>> do enough of that.
>> Huge. I mean, like I I remember coming
up as a as a you know, a staffer, if the
CEO noticed what I was doing and gave me
a compliment, I could I could go for a
year, you know?
And so, I do I make a big effort to try
and pay that forward in some way. Okay,
so I took two things away from there.
Um
be careful not to hire a bunch of bozos.
>> Well, yeah. How do you do that?
Oh, and my second takeaway is be very
present and give
pos- give positive affirmation from time
to time. And And negative, too. You have
to be able to let people know when
they're not doing a good job. And say,
"I'm kind of disappointed in you." And
it's not like, you know, "You're fired."
Whatever. It's [clears throat] more just
like, "Hey,
I expect more from you." And the thing
is, that that's a personal
accountability. That's really powerful.
One other thing I know we'll come back
to your question. I think one other
thing about 200 to 2,000
is that there's an asymmetry. In In a
startup, there's this amount of work and
this many people to do it. So, you have
to be really selective about what work
you choose to take on. In 200 to 2,000,
there's this amount of work and this
many people, which actually means you
can grow someone's career really fast
and that's a great trade. Work hard and
we'll move you quickly through the
organization. We'll give you experience
that you could never get at another
company. That's a really powerful way to
sort of get the most out of your human
capital. Above 2,000, you have this much
work and you have this many people,
which means they're fighting for the
best work and that's politics. And
everybody talks about how they don't
like politics.
>> How do you keep it out?
>> [snorts]
>> You fight like hell to make sure that
that asymmetry still favors uh work
versus people, because that that's sort
of the root cause, in my mind, of
politics.
And you do other things, too. You say,
"We don't have a political culture." Or
when you see someone behaving in a
political manner, you say, you make an
example of it and say, "This is not how
we behave. We don't do this." I think
that's, you know, sort of setting a
norm.
Um hiring leaders who are not political
and then allowing them or encouraging
them to model non-political,
non-hierarchical behaviors. But I think
the fundamental is this asymmetry of
work to people, because what happens is
people get territorial and they start to
protect their work or they start to
protect their opportunity and then that
becomes You're You're You're your
talking to each other about what you
should do versus your customers. And
then
>> like that. I'm going to be Mind if I
borrow your little
>> You're welcome to completely [laughter]
steal it. I don't I'm sure someone told
me. I just forgotten who it was.
>> One of the things I notice in these
companies is like
it's the director layer comes in.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah. And that it's it's by
definition a middle management layer.
>> Um
and I encourage founders to push that
director layer off as as long as they
can.
>> Yeah. Um
do you have any
advice for like when that comes in, how
do you make that productive? How does it
not turn into Dilbert?
Well, um and by the way, for those of
you don't know, Dilbert is a late '90s
comic strip with the pointy-haired boss.
>> [laughter]
>> I guess I guess everybody knows Dilbert,
or maybe I don't know. I think my kids
If I ask my kids, I'm sure they'd be
like, "What are you talking about?"
>> That's a good point. But But okay, I
know. Just so okay, just setting the So,
I talk to a lot of millennials and a lot
of Gen Z now, so I got to be really on
it.
Um You got a lot of rizz, by the way.
What's that?
>> You got a lot of rizz. [laughter] Thank
you. Thank you very much. Um no cap. Um
so
>> Like stuff just slows down. And like the
to-do list for HubSpot
like it just got shorter. Like the
bigger you get, the less you get done.
Do you have tricks on how to keep the
pace going? Yeah. Yeah, okay. I got a
couple tricks. I don't know. Um I think
they work. But uh here's here's one.
Okay, so the first thing is you keep as
few layers between the top and the
bottom. Meaning, you know, you don't
have senior directors and directors and
VPs and senior Like you just try and
kind of resist that for as long as
possible. I think this is famously a
flat organization if you can do that.
So, that I think that's that's one way
to do it. I think the second one is when
you think about middle management, um I
often favor promoting people internally
in the company into middle management as
opposed to hiring them. Now, I don't
always do that. But one one of the
reasons you do that is because you're
able to identify both the kinds of
people who might be good at it, but also
you're able to identify are they true
blue believers and do they have the
passion and the mission? Because the
worst thing you can have is somebody
who's in middle management who has no
ambition. Mhm. Because that's actually
the Dilbert. The Dilbert's like, I I
don't want my life to be complicated. I
want my work life to be as as manageable
as possible, and I'm going to manage
everything to be managed. And that's the
definition of an empty suit, right? What
you hire is an ambitious middle manager
whose ambition is to be a CEO. And know
that at some point they're going to
leave because they're going to have to.
But that ambitious middle manager is one
of the most effective prophylactics
against sort of the propagation of
bureaucracy. And I think the other thing
that you do is you say, "Listen, um we
really are going to empower you, and
we're going to hold you accountable."
And then you make that true. You can't
hire a dog and then bark for them. You
have to hire somebody and say like, "You
have got to do this, and I'm going to
hold you accountable for it. I might
have some advice for you, and I might
have some guidance. And and like but but
you've got to do it. And it comes back
sort of a variation on ambitious middle
management, but it's basically we're
going to give you the keys to the car.
So, drive fast, but don't crash. Yeah,
yeah. And and I think that the last
piece of it is you create a company
culture that reinforces that that's like
re- risk-taking. You know, we're going
to we're going to let you take some
risk. And um but we're going to support
you through that. And we're going to
give you the the best advice we can. It
goes back to this asymmetry thing where
if you have enough time and energy to
talk to people in middle management, you
can one, root out the people who are
>> [snorts]
>> the Dilberts because you're talking to
them. And then two, you can find the
ones who are not the Dilberts that you
can encourage them and model and say,
"Hey, do what do what Sal's doing. Sal's
doing an amazing job." Okay, related to
this, this is more in B2B than B2C,
and you worked in a bunch of B2B
businesses. As the layers come in, the
distance between the CEO and the
customer Yeah. increases. Do you have
any hacks for
Okay, now you ain't got a bunch of
layers.
How do you stay in touch with the
customer? How does that customer's voice
propagate through the org?
>> Yeah. Well, I I I worked at SurveyMonkey
for a couple of years. And this is one
of the things that we did was like to
make sure the voice of the customer was
sort of
both programmatically pulled into the
company and then distributed within the
company. So, I think the ways you do
that are like, you know, NPS surveys and
sharing the the verbatim. And you have
rituals and meetings where you do that.
And I I can't remember, was it HubSpot
that where they had the customer at the
table every time? We did. Right? You
always had like
>> We still do at the board meeting. We
invite a customer. We do a customer
panel. And I just I think that's what
you do. You set a culture that says
it is part of the your job expectations
that you're going to have customer
interactions. If that's cruising Reddit
or talking to people on airplanes or
going to, you know, at B2B going and
talking to customers, you are just going
to do that. That's part of the job
expectation. And you create both the
time and the expectation that you do
that so that you end up with more
customer input. And then you say, "By
the way, this is how you're successful
in this organization. You're successful
when you're framing things in terms of
customer needs and solutions for
customers and customer narratives and
customer values. And in health in
particular, like it's actually really
easy because the customer stories for us
are things like, "You saved my life. Uh
you got me pregnant. Um
you you saved my father's life. You
helped me change my life for the
better." And those narratives, by the
way, are incredibly motivating. Those
kinds of narratives, like people wake up
in the morning at at Aura and are like,
"Man, I I could I could I could save
someone's life today. What am I going to
What am I going to do to make that
better?" And the thing is that that
flywheel of like both customer
understanding means you do a better job,
but also customer empathy for something,
you know, that's important.
It just drives like, I don't know, extra
10, 15, 20, 30% of performance because
people believe in what they're doing.
Okay. A lot of founders have asked me
about this the kind of the missionary to
mercenary ratio. And the mercenaries
start showing up around 200.
>> Yeah, yeah. Um
talk to me about
>> Hey, listen, if you're in sales and
you're not a mercenary,
right? Um and and so I mean it's it's
it's different by different companies,
right? I mean, some companies are more
sales-driven, some are more
marketing-driven, some are more
product-driven. So, I think that that
ratio, by the way, you need both. You
need missionaries and mercenaries. I
think if you have mercenaries in your
product and engineering org, probably
not the right place for mercenaries. You
want people who want to build beautiful
things that are amazing that that are
express who they are.
>> building something boring?
Same. You find the people who are
passionate about it, you know? I mean,
uh you find the people who care about
what it is that they're doing. Or you
find a way to make them care. I mean,
SurveyMonkey, it's interesting. At
SurveyMonkey, um we translated the
mission into giving a voice to all the
people who don't have voices. And And
the thing is like, okay, sort of sort of
true. Yep. But the reality is the people
who came to work were like, "Yeah, I'm
amplifying the voices of like employees
or customers or whatever." And that was
the reason for them to be committed to
their mission. So, I think you got to
find something that does it. Um I just I
I think it is so important to have
missionaries in the company and to to
elevate them. At the same time, you
know, if you're going to market, you
want people who have commercial
instincts.
And And commercial instincts are
correlated highly
with a mercenary viewpoint. Now,
I think mercenaries are also a caustic
term. Yeah. It basically implies that
you're willing to kill for money.
I don't mean it that way. Well,
>> [laughter]
>> no, but that's what I'm saying. That's
what I'm saying. Like that's what that
term means. And what you really want are
people who like
they want to solve customer needs
uh and drive a commercial outcome. And
that's what That's what, you know, the
the thrill of the chase, the the sense
of victory when a customer when you have
a customer win. And you know, doesn't
have to be a zero-sum game where like
the customer loses if the company wins.
And by the way, that they get their
jollys out of seeing the numbers and
putting them up. And I just think you
need both. Yeah. Maybe it's a Maybe it's
80/20, I don't know. Making it up. Okay.
You've been through some dramatic
moments in your career. Um
and I want to get to that. But one of
those dramatic moments was you made a
business model shift.
>> Yeah.
Uh historically, you just bought the
Ring, and that was it.
>> Typical hardware model. You introduced a
$6-a-month uh subscription service.
Can you And it was controversial. Your
customers were not happy. Um
just take us behind the scenes of that
decision. Was that kind of percolating
in the org, in your head? Was that the
first thing you did when you came in as
the CEO? Was it contentious within the
leadership team?
Um
I I think the answer is it was the
strategy.
Um and the strategy was in order to be
the most competitive hardware company in
the world, you needed to be a really
great software company. And to be uh a
really great software company, you
needed a a business model and a way to
deliver periodic software value. The
problem with the hardware model is that
you ship your hardware, and it's fixed.
And that's it. And you might ship a, you
know, a little bit of a software update
or a firmware update or something. But
like really, you're not really changing
the value proposition for that product
with new capabilities. And the reason
why is because when you ship the next
version of the hardware, you want all
that value to go in that next version of
hardware. So, someone moves from their
iPhone Totally. 13 to their iPhone 14.
Totally. So, you're disincented actually
to provide value to your customer over
time. The power of a subscription model
is that you got to kind of earn your
stripes with your customers every month.
Yeah. Every month. Now, by the way, $6 a
month for Aura is kind of a low bar.
Whatever, two cups of coffee. And if
we're delivering information that helps
you with your health, the value of that
is so priceless. Like the two times, you
know, that like we help you get to bed
early, or we predict that you're going
to be sick, or we tell you when to, you
know,
procreate in order to have a baby. Like
the value of that is so high that the
the ratio of V to P, value to price,
is measured in multiples.
>> contentious inside the org? Okay, so I'm
getting to that, right? So, but so I'm
saying it was our strategy. It was our
strategy.
>> that in as your strategy from what I
understood. Uh well, no, actually it
would have already It was already there.
And I think there were things that I did
maybe to sort of tune it a little bit,
but and I don't even say I, I'd say the
team did this.
But but the the Was it contentious? It
was contentious. And partially
[clears throat] it was contentious
because going against the grain of
expectation, hardware should be a single
price.
>> Yeah. It was was contentious. And this
idea that like
um I don't know, you probably have some
subscriptions that you would you would
be really sad if you stopped paying for
them, right? Like Netflix and Spotify or
something like that. You probably use
those things, and if you if you were
forced to give them away Hubs by. And if
you were forced to give them away, you'd
be really sad. Yes. Right? So, the idea
is like well, if you can do that, then
you probably have a right to charge for
subscription. Now, that being said,
there are lots of subscriptions that you
probably pay for that you don't get any
value from. Mhm. And you continue to pay
because of either inertia or whatever.
And those things we used to call them in
the back of the days, we called them
zombie subscriptions, and the customer
who used them were sleeping bears. Yep.
And you know what you don't do with
sleeping bears? Poke them. Yeah, you
don't poke them. And so, as a result,
what you want to do is avoid the
situation where you got a bunch of
customers who are not getting value, but
you're still collecting price.
In which case, the value is low and the
P is high. You want to avoid that. So, I
think we felt that that was the strategy
that was going to be okay. So, that
controversy
part actually was relatively easy to
kind of navigate because we said,
"Listen, one, um there's a reason that
we're doing this. We're creating a
business model that will allow us to
invest in software value and deliver
feature value and analysis value on your
health over the periods of time. And
then and like the product will get
better every month. And like SaaS,
you're getting a new release every
time." And by the way, turns out that
worked. Mhm. We don't We have some of
the like literally the best retention I
have ever seen in my 30 years of working
in subscription business at Oura. And
that's because the value that we deliver
is constantly a multiple of the P, the
price that we take. So, that was that
was that part. The second part of it
was, "But what about all our customers
who bought a product? How can we
introduce a subscription for them?" And
that was easy. That was give them a
pathway to get to effectively what they
had before. And so, in the in the
in our version of it, if you were gen
two customer,
if you wanted to get a gen three and you
paid to get a gen three, and we gave
upgrade discounts, which is crazy. Who
gives upgrade discounts on hardware? If
you if you did, you would be a lifetime
subscriber. And it was to make that
transition in business model as smooth
as possible. And so, in doing that,
actually tremendous value because if
you're a lifetime subscriber for the you
know, committing to just the next
version, you were going to get free
software for the rest of your you know,
time that you wore an Oura ring. Great
deal. In fact, some of our most loyal,
highest retaining customers are those
customers because they have no
disincentive to churn. So, that was the
second thing. And then the third thing,
and this was a little bit like the
genius of it. Can you buy a Hubspot in a
like a perpetual license model? No. No.
Why not? Because that's how it's sold.
>> Mhm. Same thing. I think people have an
expectation about subscriptions that
it's the freemium business model. I give
you 50% of the value for free because I
want you to try the application, and
then if you pay, you'll get the other
50%. And we did something very
different. We said, "It is a
subscription product. And if you pay, uh
the product will be as functional as it
is, and if you don't pay, it'll collapse
down to be very minimally functional."
It's It's not it won't work, but it's
not 50% of the value. And so, as a
result, interestingly, when we rolled
out the subscriptions, what we saw was
that some people were like, "Oh,
I'm not going to pay and A lot of
people. And [laughter] well, actually
less than you would think.
>> Oh. It was I remember hearing
>> It was a lot of agita. It was a lot of
agita, but like the reality was
It was a lot It was a lot of noise. And
I think you know,
you make a bargain with your customer,
it's hard to change that. There's no no
question about that. But what would
happen is like someone would see the
product, and then they'd stop paying for
whatever reason. Sometimes it's just
like their credit card died and they
didn't update it or whatever. And it
would collapse down to sort of its
non-subscription
um kind of experience. And then they'd
be like 24 hours later, they would renew
because they would see that the value
that they were getting was absolutely
worth that price. And I think that that
is the key. If you can keep that value
over price ratio north of 1 and 1/2 or
2, Mhm. then you know, you're doing it
right, and your customers are going to
reward you with retention and loyalty.
Okay. When when this rolled out, it was
noisy. You were newish.
>> Yeah. And you were catching hell on the
internet.
>> Yeah.
What did that feel like inside your
body? Did that that bother you as it
rolled out? Like that kind of thing
bothers me when that happened. It it
did. And I'm I'm I'm you know, I don't
know if
if this is something that everybody
does, but like I spend a lot of time
reading Reddit and interacting with
customers, and I respond to people who
you know, connect with me on LinkedIn.
People were flaming us, and and I would
argue with them. Not argue, but like be
like, "Hey, let me tell you what this
means is that if we can invest in this,
we can we can invest more in science,
and we can invest more in research, and
we can deliver you more value."
>> When you explain, you lose.
I'm not sure that's true. Okay. Because
I because sometimes I would win. Okay.
Right? And some And when I won one
argument like that, that person would
become uh you know, an agent of making
that argument 10 times to 10 other
people without me in the room. And the
reality is is like
if you think about sort of the the the
that that transition, Mhm. it's been an
unqualified success. Unqualified
success. At any point during the very
noisy parts, did you and the team say,
>> [snorts]
>> "Maybe we shouldn't have done it. Maybe
we should roll it back." Or inside your
belly, you know, after a couple of rough
Reddit threads, did you think, "Maybe I
should roll it back." and then talk
yourself out of it?
I think once.
I think once. And I can't remember the
exact moment, but I do remember where I
was where I was having the conversation.
I was in the garage at Salesforce Tower.
Okay. And I was talking to someone on
the phone, and I was like, "Oh, this is
like this painful, and what do we And
and I thought, "God, you know, the only
way out is through."
The only cuz because if we if we do roll
it back, then everybody would have been
right, and we would have been wrong, and
there's no recovering from that. So, we
went through. And by the way, like I I
think it was the right it was the
absolute right way to approach that
problem. Yeah. You get You have to get
Maybe this is a good CEO lesson from a
person who has been a CEO now for you
know, some number of years.
Is you got to be comfortable
being uncomfortable.
>> Mhm. That is the key. That is the nature
of it. Mhm. You can feel that
discomfort, and you got to let that
discomfort and sit with it because like
that's actually where the magic happens.
When you're doing something that either
no one else has done or doesn't feel
like it can be done. We were defining a
new way to think about hardware um and
and like a business model around these
kinds of products. No one else was doing
it this way. It was just us. Okay. I'm a
customer. You've got one I believe you
got one subscription level. It's the
right?
I have a lot of conversations with
founders about pricing. Like a lot.
Everyone
>> By the way, that's great.
>> thinks but think Everyone thinks We'll
talk about that more. Yeah. And
there's like there's entropy and there's
like gravity in the world where over
time the pricing just gets more
expensive for everything almost. And
over time it gets really complicated.
And I think there's a big cost to that
complication.
I also think there's a cost particularly
for startups for making their product
too expensive. It creates friction,
slows down the sales process, it creates
an adversarial relationship with the
customer. And my thinking is that gap
between what they would pay and what
they pay, there's goodwill in there that
pays itself back over time.
>> Um
why don't you introduce another tier
with more stuff in it? Do you have these
conversations? What's your What's your
pricing?
>> time we bring a new feature and we
decide to put it you know, into the
product for free,
>> Yes. I think about that value over price
ratio and keep keeping that value over
price ratio north of 1.5 or 2. And new
features is part of the promise that we
made in there. Now, there might be
something that's completely non-linear,
right? Some some value. Um
uh example, we we partner with a company
called Natural Cycles. They make a FDA
uh cleared digital contraceptive. If you
use Oura in concert with Natural Cycles,
it's it's a way to not have to do
hormonal birth control or have a
surgical IUD and and you know, have a
way to not get pregnant. Yep. Wow,
interesting. Should that be free inside
of a $6 a month subscription? Probably
not. And why not? Oh, well, because the
value that you're getting from that
much much greater than the value you
might get from some advice about your
sleep or your health or how many steps
you took or whatever, all the things
that you you do value. And so, in that
case, there is kind of a a tier Yeah. um
because you're buying Oura and you're
paying an Oura subscription, and then
you're adding Natural Cycles on top of
that. And that Natural Cycles I think is
like $20 a month. So, you understand
that value. So, the the key is is that
in I think your your premise is really
the right one, which is the delta
between what they pay and what they
might pay Goodwill. And think about that
in the right way, you're thinking about
like what is the optimal What's the
optimal price point? Um I also think to
your you know, maybe to underscore what
you said, but worth repeating,
complexity kills. It does. Complexity
kills. And I know some people are like,
"Well,
it gives our sales people a lot of
ability to understand how much value
we're delivering for the customer and
then price into that value."
For consumer products or products where
like it's a
a single decision and there's a low you
know, like people can turn off Oura,
they you know, click the button
>> Yeah. and they're out, you got to make
it simple so that they can do the
equation in their head, "Am I getting
enough value for this $6?" And the
answer is yes. Okay.
Another question that a lot of founders
and CEOs I coach ask is about doing big
partnerships.
>> Yeah. Um
How You've got some interesting ones,
very interesting ones.
>> Yeah. Uh
Gucci I believe is one of your partners.
>> one. Fascinating. Great stories with
Gucci. I'll tell you that much. Okay, I
want to hear that. Most partnerships
fail.
Um over over the long haul.
Um if the incentives aren't aligned.
Okay, so talk about that. Tell me about
how the Gucci partnership happened, and
tell me about the incentives. Well, let
let's let's zoom all the way out. I
think you have to be uh selective about
who you partner with. And maybe one of
the criteria for that selection is do
you have mission alignment and do you
have incentive alignment? Because if you
do, then you're building something that
probably has more durability than a very
commercial transactional partnership,
which is just about if you make money, I
make money and make you know, there's
just there's more to it than that and
that that alignment, by the way, will
get you through those rough moments when
your partnership might dissolve. Okay.
Like a marriage or something like that,
right? So, I think it's really important
to to recognize that there are different
classes of partners, too. There are
people who are on your platform and you
know, your obligation to them is to
provide that platform and have it be
robust and performant and scalable, but
you don't have to do a whole lot for
them. And then there are ones that you
are like, you're you know, Natural
Cycles and Oura, great example of a
really, really close partnership and if
one of us got into a bind, we would come
to each other's aid in a second, in a
hot second. So, different scales of
partnership. Now, the question is like,
how do you make that decision?
I actually think
um
if you're a vertical product with a
narrow customer ICP, actually guess
what? Service that customer really,
really well. And if you're a broad
horizontal product and you need to
service a wide range of ICPs and a wide
range of customer needs, then
partnership is literally your best way
because it turns out you're going to
need that both to be able to build a
complete solution or or product for a
customer and go to market. Because you
need that go-to-market. Maybe infamously
in enterprise software, going to market
in all these different categories, you
need partners to do it. This is why
Salesforce had, you know, force.com and
like every every platform company in the
world does it. So, it's really important
to understand what it is you're trying
to accomplish. All right. So, that's
that. So, with Gucci, what was
interesting is they were both. How did
it start? I don't know.
>> [laughter]
>> Who called? Did they call you? Uh You
called them?
>> You know, it's a good question. I'm not
sure.
>> have been on my short list of No, I'm
not sure. Well, you know, we we sell a
lot to women. Of course. And you know,
one of the sort of critiques from women
is like, can you make it can you make it
more appealing? Can you make it more
beautiful? Can you put diamonds on it?
We actually for a while had an Oura Ring
with a diamond in it. Um and people
loved it. I mean, and what that sort of
tells you is that there's utility value
that we deliver, but there's also kind
of like this intangible fashion value.
So, uh when when it came time to partner
with with Gucci, they they had the
design. They had a design that was a
successful design. It was a black ring
with sort of uh what's called a gold
torsion, which is
>> Wait, what do you mean they had a they
brought you an idea?
>> No, they already had a design that was
successful in the market. It was a
non-tech ring. Okay.
>> It was just the design part. It was the
fashion part of it.
>> Okay. They had a ring that they that
worked. Yeah, and and they sell lots of
rings and so this but this one was
particularly successful. It was black
with gold and the interlocking G's and
it was kind of like I would describe it
as the kind of ring you might wear if
you were a Roman emperor at a
gladiatorial contest where you were
about to decide whether or not like
someone was going to live or die. It's
like that kind of vibe.
>> Got it. And um
>> [laughter]
>> It was I mean, it's beautiful. It was
boss. I mean, you felt like a Roman
emperor when you wore this ring.
>> Okay. I need I need some more boss in my
life.
>> Yeah, of course, we all do. So, um
you know, we the two things that I
remember so distinctly about that was
one, actually goes to pricing and we
were like, how how much do you think we
should price this for? And like we
charge our $299 is what we charge and
they were like, $999. And I was like, no
way.
>> [laughter]
>> We can't charge that much. This is this
is the Gucci team.
>> Which person?
Um Were you dealing with the CEO of
Gucci?
>> Marco Bizzarri. Okay.
>> And he's a genius. I love him. He's no
longer the CEO of Gucci. Um but he said,
look, $999.
It's a no-brainer. And I'm sorry for the
accent, but like it was it was amazing
because he had so much confidence and we
said, wait, is that because of Gucci?
And he says, no.
Because of Oura. You don't know how
valuable it is.
And so, we priced it at $999 and I
remember being like my jaw was on the
floor and I was terrified that it was
not going to work. And when we launched
it, literally we sold through them in
like 5 weeks. Sweet. And it was just And
the thing is it's because again, the
power of non-utility value.
It's an intangible, but it's one people
care a lot about.
>> it? Did you sell it or did they sell it?
>> Well, so that was the other that was the
other observation. Remember I said like
partners can be distribution and they
can be value. So, they gave us this sort
of value. That their value was the
design and the Gucci brand and the power
of their collaborations and a customer
base who loves Gucci and all that stuff.
They also had distribution. They had
retail distribution. So, they sold it.
We didn't even sell it on our website.
You had to go to Gucci's uh website or
to a Gucci store. Okay. And the thing
>> were your channel. They were our first
channel partner. And the thing is is it
was like hotcakes, of course. Japan and
the Middle East, top two markets, flying
off the shelves in the Japan and Middle
East. And what we learned was, oh my
god, this thing, it's a piece of
jewelry. It expresses something about
you and you want to look at it. You want
to put it on your body and you want to
look at it and say, oh, does it look
good on my fingers? How's the shape of
my finger? And we were like, oh,
insight, retail is a critical channel
for us and that gave us the confidence
to enter retail. Now we're in Target,
Best Buy, Costco, you know,
you know, we'll be everywhere and that
insight was critical because what it did
is it put this object of desire in the
focus of people uh in a way that we
couldn't do that on the website. Wait,
and how did the Don't give me anything
confidential, but how did the terms
work? Did Gucci pay you $299 for
everyone they sold? Um
yes. That's basically the way it worked.
[laughter]
Yeah, they we they were our distribution
partner. There were there were other
elements of it that had to do with with
the way the subscription worked. Um you
know, because of course uh we we
you know, we had to we had to solve that
problem. But but effectively, yeah, they
were a distribution partner and and
Gucci's famous for doing collaborations.
So, of course that that's part of what
they they knew how to do that really
well. Okay. This is scarcity, by the
way. So, that's the that's the so what
of that.
>> We just had the Ferrari CEO on talking
about scarcity.
Um okay. When I was growing up at
HubSpot in the early days of HubSpot, uh
salesforce.com was a terrific partner.
They sold sales software, we sold
marketing software. They were the older,
bigger
player in the space. I would go to the
Salesforce conference every year,
Dreamforce. Waiting to see.
>> Sitting there like
>> [laughter]
>> Here's our new It's called Salespot.
And then 2012.
>> Yeah. Yeah, they We used to say,
um
Salesforce is to sales as HubSpot is to
marketing and under our breath we'd say,
until Salesforce says it.
>> [laughter]
>> Anyway, they did it.
Uh and that was uh that was painful, but
we pivoted, it all worked out great.
Uh
I mean, and don't spin me on this one.
Why would why would I spin you?
>> Cuz I hear What is there to even spin
about?
>> Okay. Apple. Yeah. They have their big
announcement.
>> Yeah. Um you're sitting there watching
the announcement. Are Do you have the
same feeling in your stomach I had when
I was at Dreamforce that they're going
to come out with a ring and blah blah
blah blah blah. You know, I mean, that's
obviously um
you know, one of the things we think
about is like, who and which major tech
platform is going to come out with it.
But I'll give you a couple of reasons
why actually
I sleep soundly, okay, about that. Um
and I'm not spinning you. I'm just going
to tell you how it is.
>> [laughter]
>> Um so, the first one is you might be
surprised to learn this, but really 2/3
of Oura Ring wearers have a second
wearable.
Yep. And most often that second wearable
is an Apple Watch. Yeah. And that's
because in weird way, they're
complementary.
Um we measure at night. During the
night, your Apple Watch is usually on
your bedside stand charging.
Uh they provide a lot of utility during
the day with notifications and alerts
and a screen to display it on. We're
kind of a quiet in the background check
engine light for your body that sort of
So, kind of complementary. I think the
world is going to be one where
um you're going to have a bunch of
different you know, things that deal
with you and your health and those
things are going to talk and they have
to talk. That's the second reason. And
so, in a world where you have an Apple
Watch or a Garmin or whatever, like your
Oura Ring, which is measuring over time,
long periods of time, measuring at night
when your body's at rest and so the data
quality and signal is very, very clean
and very, very clear. And by the way,
the accuracy of measuring on the finger
is very different than measuring on the
wrist. Our signal strength is 50 to 100
times stronger there and so as a result,
more information is stored, we can
derive more things from it. All sort of
interesting. So, that kind of
complementarity still exists. And then
maybe the last one and I think this this
is maybe more specific and germane to
Apple
um is that like
I think all of this stuff is
data is kind of the the oil for
the predictions, the inferences that an
AI might make and in order to do that,
you need to collect a lot of data. And
we have a huge advantage in that. Yeah.
Uh a lot of people talking about
hardware these days. Any advice on
getting into the hardware business? And
is there is there different ways to
think about the business model and how
it works? It's then then cuz you kind of
grew up in the software business. Yeah,
I grew up in software business and so I
think I always tend to think in terms of
software. But like advice I might offer
for for hardware folks, I think the the
the barriers are are interestingly lower
now. But I but you have to maybe resist
some of those um shortcuts. Uh so, for a
long time famously, we did not
manufacture in China.
Um and for a lot of different reasons.
Today actually we we we're opening up a
a factory in the United States uh to
serve one of our one of our customers
who cares a lot about security and
privacy. Um so, we made a decision that
was maybe not the easy decision. The
easy decision is like, find a factory
manufacture in China. It's the cheapest,
fastest and they they do an amazing job.
And we for a long time really kept
control of that. By the way, that was a
competitive advantage for us. It allowed
us to build the art and science of of
building Oura Rings in a way that not
everybody could copy and gave us a you
know, a lead. So, resist that shortcut.
That that might be one. I think the
second one and this goes to your
business model question is to think
about the power of hardware and software
Yeah. and how you think about those
business models having interplay. We
don't say, oh, it's a piece of hardware
and if you want, you can buy the
subscription. Nope, it's a subscription
product that's integrated hardware and
software and that is the value
proposition. That's the business model.
By the way, I think that's really really
useful.
Um and then um
maybe the last one is you think about
what are the constraints in hardware,
which are like, I don't know, the laws
of physics and cost and the fact that
you have to have physical inventory and
all those things, and find ways to get
really really good at those. If you're
going to build hardware, you have to be
really really good at those things, and
you have to be really good at
forecasting. Yeah. And so uh make sure
you are good before you try and scale up
or spend too much money. Um the last
thing I'll say, and this is inspired by
being here, um is that I think AI is
changing the game. Yeah. AI is changing
the game for how you do this. The the
ability to iterate over a thousand
different designs and to test them and
model them, like that's unprecedented.
And so if you're doing anything in
hardware, think about that. Okay, last
question.
A lot of people listening to this
podcast are, let's say, a VP at such and
such a company.
And they want to be a CEO someday.
What advice would you give them?
Maybe they don't want to start
something, they want to become a CEO.
I I think again, this is sort of
reflecting on my own experience, and so
it's an N of one. Um but I I was very
intentional in the middle part of my
career about operating every function.
Mhm. So, you know, I've run call
centers.
Um well, I've been on a sales team. Um
you know, I was a product person by
training.
Um you know, I did a bunch of time in
the field. Um you know what, I was an
M&A executive. I did internal startups
and I did like, you know, running big
businesses. So, I think it's about that
diversity of experience as a CEO that
one gives you empathy for all the
different functions that you're
ultimately going to have to oversee and
maybe even assess the leaders that you
choose for those functions. And then
maybe more importantly, um you start to
see how they how the interplay works
inside of a company because you have an
appreciation for each one at a finer
grain than you might otherwise.
Interesting. I I just interviewed the
CEO of Goldman Sachs, who obviously
isn't the founder of Goldman Sachs. He
said the exact same thing.
>> Is that right?
>> Yes. That's interesting.
>> Yes.
I appreciate you. Thanks for coming on
the pod. You're a fantastic. Congrats on
all your success.
>> Thank you. Yes. I'm a happy customer.
Thank you. Stay stay healthy. Thank you.
Okay, I hope you like that chat with
Tom. Here's I'm giving you some of my
takes on it.
He's a first-time CEO, and I spend most
of my life these days coaching
first-time CEOs in really great
companies.
And I kind of added up the things that
surprise first-time CEOs. So, if you're
a CEO want-to-be, these are some of the
the surprises. The first surprise is
it's actually way more stressful than
you thought when you started it. And for
me, where it got really stressful wasn't
so much like 10 employees. It was when
we hit 100 employees, and I just started
thinking about, man, all those employees
are counting on me. Their spouse and
their kids are counting on me. A lot of
times their parents are counting on me.
And so my stress level really cranked
around 100. I started getting help for
it. I start I got on an SSRI. I was
having panic attacks and kind of calmed
myself down. But the ironic thing is the
bigger the organization gets, kind of
the more pressure's on you.
Um
the other thing that seems to surprise
most first-time CEOs is really you're
constantly selling. You're selling to
accounts, customers. You're selling to
potential employees. You're selling to
investors. You're selling to partners.
You're just always selling, and that
surprises particularly technical
founders.
Uh the third thing is just like the
sense that no one's coming to save you.
Like in my previous jobs, I always had a
boss or I had all these resources around
me in a bigger company, but like it's
really on you. Your VCs aren't going to
save you. Your co-founders aren't going
to save you. The responsibility is much
much bigger than being an exec in
another startup. As part of that, like
as a CEO, you get plenty of complaints.
You get complaints about your VCs,
complaints about your employees,
complaints about your customers. You got
a you you got a lot of complaints if
you're like me. There is nobody to
complain to except your co-founder. You
can't really complain full hog to your
VCs. Uh you can't really complain to
your employees, so it's like pretty
contained. Almost every one of the 10
CEOs I've interviewed has been through
some kind of really hard crisis, like
Parker from his first startup blowing up
to his big drama with Deal. Uh almost
all of them have really traumatic
crises, and that can kill a company
quite easily unless you're quite
thick-skinned. So, the the
thick-skinnededness is really important.
The problem when you hit those crises is
you think like you're floundering in the
water, you're in the middle of this
crisis, you think it will never end. And
then people on X and people on Reddit
will dunk on you and tell you what a
[__] you are. That surprised me. It
shouldn't have, but it did.
Um the hours are brutal. Whether your
company's 996 or not, you're 996,
especially in the early days. Firing
people is worse than you thought. It
never gets easier. The other thing that
kind of happened to me is the larger the
company got,
I noticed that the company and I, like
my brand, kind of merged with the
company. And everything I said and
everything I did, all the employees, the
more everyone was watching them
everything very carefully. And they may
not have pretended they were listening
that carefully, but if I said something
in the hallway, like wouldn't it be
great if it was this feature, 5 minutes
later someone was coding it. So, you
really can't think out loud that much as
a CEO.
Those are some of the surprises of
first-time CEOs. He talked about a
couple of those. A bunch of the other
ones I've picked up from the CEOs I work
with. Hopefully you're avoiding some of
them. Tom is an expert in going from 200
to 2,000 and not not losing your mind on
the way. And typically what happens from
200 to 2,000 is things really start to
slow down, and lots of companies kind of
die in there.
Um
a couple things to avoid that quagmire.
One is there's an old expression, hire
slow and fire fast.
It's very old, and it's very true. Now,
it's easier said than done. Lots of
founders tell me, the first time I
thought I should have fired somebody, I
should have fired them cuz I always end
up firing them. I say that same thing,
but I never really did it. I was always
more patient than I should have been,
but I'm also a homo sapien, and it was
hard for me to do that.
The second thing I would say is you hit
200 employees,
and maybe get some VPs, and that's when
the director layer shows up. And in
particular when you hire that director
layer from the outside, they're kind of
a professional middle manager. And so
push that director layer off as long as
you can. Keep the span of control. Maybe
it's not Jensen Huang's 60, but keep it
wide and avoid that middle layer.
Um the thing that really helped HubSpot
is we talked about
EV,
enterprise value,
versus TV,
your team's value, versus MEV, your own
value. And the thing
that happens inside of companies is as
they get bigger, people don't solve for
themselves as much, they solve for the
team. And when they solve for their
team, they kind of sub-optimize the team
next to them, so that TV is where a lot
of execs in a lot of companies fall
down. So, I recommend that. I wrote on
whiteboards all over the place, EV
greater than sign TV greater than sign
MEV, and I kind of pounded that into the
company. Anytime someone in a meeting
was talking very TV, I would push on the
EV. I don't think you should have all
been there, done that folks. I think you
should have 50% been there, done that,
and 50% homegrown. That institutional
knowledge for the homegrown is super
useful.
People underestimate the value of
homegrown and how people can grow and
learn. So, I like that ratio.
And the last thing I would just say is
Elon, this is a big Elon thing.
I was at the Sequoia's uh base camp
event. Um must have been 10 years ago
where he did this vector alignment
thing, and he described all his
employees as vectors. And they were
different sizes. Some people were more
powerful than others, but they were kind
of all pointed in different directions.
And he said the key for him is no matter
how big or small the employee is, how do
you get them all pointed in the same
direction and get stuff done? Vector
alignment and a little tiny bit of
lightweight planning can help you a lot
with that.
Those are some of my tricks to not fall
into the 200 to 2,000 trap. Okay, Tom
had some interesting thoughts on
pricing. I do, too.
Um
you know, when Moses came down from the
mountain,
it's well known he had 10 commandments,
five on one tablet, five on the other.
It's not as well known that there was a
third tablet with an 11th and a 12th
commandment. The 11th commandment
was over time, your product's pricing
will go up.
The 12th was over time, your product's
pricing will get more complicated.
Now,
your sales organization loves that. Your
products don't. What I liked about what
Tom did, he shifted his business model
to subscription, but he kept it
relatively cheap. It's six bucks a
month.
Um and
you know, he he he didn't overcomplicate
it. It was quite simple. And I think the
move for for founders is like if the
supply and demand curve looks like this,
people very quickly rush to almost
perfectly match that supply and demand
curve, the willingness to pay with the
pricing model. And that encourages
[music] the pricing model to get more
complicated and more expensive.
I think that's fine when you're 15 years
old, but in startup mode, I think you
want a gap between those two things. You
want a less [music] adversarial
relationship with your customers. You
want to be delivering maximum value to
get word of mouth. And that gap is
goodwill, and that goodwill pays itself
back in spades. So,
don't maximize that supply and demand
curve would be my advice. Okay, those
are my thoughts on Tom. Some really good
tips [music] in there, I thought. I hope
you enjoyed it, and I'll see you on the
next episode of Long Story Short.